



WIMSE                                                           M. Novak
Internet-Draft                                                 JP Morgan
Intended status: Informational                              Y. Deshpande
Expires: 31 October 2025                                             arm
                                                           29 April 2025


            Trusted Workload Identity Reference Architecture
                draft-twi-reference-architecture-latest

Abstract

   Technological advancement coupled with security concerns demands more
   and more use cases, that require data-in-use protections.  In
   addition, regulatory bodies around the world increasingly require
   data-in-use protection and privacy enhancing technologies.  As these
   advanced technologies are being deployed, challenge remains how to
   identify the workloads and put trust behind them?  This draft will
   address the core issue of managing a trustworthy workload identity
   meeting Confidential Computing requirements.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/confidential-computing/twi.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 31 October 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Glossary
     3.1.  Workload Identity
     3.2.  Workload Credential
   4.  TWI Use Cases
   5.  Core Requirements
     5.1.  Workload deployment
     5.2.  Workload Types
     5.3.  Workload Composition
     5.4.  Workload Credential Cardinality
     5.5.  Workload Identity Persistence
     5.6.  Workload Identity Governance
     5.7.  Workload Identity Requirements specific to Remote
           Attestation
       5.7.1.  Integrating Workload Attestation with Credential
               Issuance
       5.7.2.  Integrating Workload Provenance with Credential
               Issuance
       5.7.3.  Remote Attestation of Composite Workloads
   6.  TWI Reference Architecture
     6.1.  Assumptions
     6.2.  Roles in the TWI Eco-System
       6.2.1.  Verifier
       6.2.2.  Identity Provider
       6.2.3.  Credential Issuer
     6.3.  Reference Architecture
   7.  Security Considerations
   8.  IANA Considerations
     8.1.  CBOR Tag Registrations
   9.  Acknowledgements
   10. References
     10.1.  Normative References
     10.2.  Informative References
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   To be filled

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document uses terms and concepts defined by the WIMSE and RATS
   architecture.  For a complete glossary, see Section 4 of [RFC9334] &
   [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch].

3.  Glossary

   This document uses the following terms:

3.1.  Workload Identity

3.2.  Workload Credential

4.  TWI Use Cases

   Following are some of the use cases demanding trustworthy workload
   identity.

   1.  A ML Model Owner (acting as Relying Party) wants to deploy its
       Workload with a unique identity in a privacy preserving manner.
       It needs to ensure that the deployed workload is operating in an
       environment with certain security guarantees, such as isolated
       from cloud hosting environment and can be periodically attested.

   2.  A Workload operating as a deployed lambda running in an isolated
       environment.

5.  Core Requirements

5.1.  Workload deployment

   Workloads can be deployed in a variety of environemnts.  For example:
   1.  On-premises 2.  In the public cloud 3.  On the edge node of a
   network 4.  On remotely managed IoT devices 5.  On users personal
   device

   The TWI Architecture MUST support all the above deployments.

5.2.  Workload Types

   Workloads can take a wide variety of shapes.  For example 1.  They
   can be Confidential Virtual Machines 2.  Confidential Containers and
   Kubernetes pods 3.  Enclaves 4.  Serverless Computing (lambdas, step
   functions, etc) 5.  Services running in the cloud or on-premises
   like, database service, queuing service 6.  Managed services,
   including SaaS products

   The TWI Architecture MUST support all the above types of workloads.

5.3.  Workload Composition

   Workloads can be standalone or composite workloads.  For this
   specification, a composite workload consists of multiple components
   from deployment through to decommissioning and potentially spanning
   devices or having components residing on the same physical device.

   The TWI Architecture MUST be able to define workload identity for
   both standalone and composite workloads.

5.4.  Workload Credential Cardinality

   A Workload may have multiple distinct credentials issued to it, e.g.,
   for purposes of inbound, outbound and internal (component-to-
   component for composite workloads) authentication.

5.5.  Workload Identity Persistence

   Workload Identity must persists in a predictable manner with regular
   datacenter maintenance operations such as workload migration.

   Two distinct scenarios have two different requirements.

   1.  Operations that would change the Workload Credentials (modifying
       some of the claims), should require redeployment where the old
       Workload is torn down and the new one stood up in its place with
       different Workload Credentials

   2.  Operations that would preserve the Workload Credentials, such as
       migration within the datacenter between equivalent hardware
       instances, need not require new Workload Credentials to be
       issued.

5.6.  Workload Identity Governance

   Workload Identity systems and solutions must be governable, with
   following capabilities: 1.  Maintaining control over and a history of
   all policies and decisions involved in issuing and evaluating
   Workload Identities and Credentials.

   1.  Ability to identify, isolate and remedy vulnerable Workloads in
       production quickly, such as when new threats are discovered or
       new attacks detected.

   2.  Additional requirements to Workload Identity governance are
       specified in the forthcoming Workload Identity Governance pattern

5.7.  Workload Identity Requirements specific to Remote Attestation

   Remote Attestation is mechanism to identify trust in a computing
   environment.

5.7.1.  Integrating Workload Attestation with Credential Issuance

5.7.2.  Integrating Workload Provenance with Credential Issuance

5.7.3.  Remote Attestation of Composite Workloads

6.  TWI Reference Architecture

   This sections describes in detail, the Reference Architecture for
   Trusted Workload Identity system

6.1.  Assumptions

6.2.  Roles in the TWI Eco-System

   The following sub-sections describe the various roles or building
   blocks that exist in the TWI eco-system.

6.2.1.  Verifier

6.2.2.  Identity Provider

6.2.3.  Credential Issuer

6.3.  Reference Architecture

7.  Security Considerations


   // TODO

8.  IANA Considerations

8.1.  CBOR Tag Registrations

9.  Acknowledgements


   // TODO

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch]
              Salowey, J. A., Rosomakho, Y., and H. Tschofenig,
              "Workload Identity in a Multi System Environment (WIMSE)
              Architecture", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-wimse-arch-04, 2 March 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-wimse-
              arch-04>.

   [RFC9334]  Birkholz, H., Thaler, D., Richardson, M., Smith, N., and
              W. Pan, "Remote ATtestation procedureS (RATS)
              Architecture", RFC 9334, DOI 10.17487/RFC9334, January
              2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9334>.

Authors' Addresses

   Mark Novak
   JP Morgan
   Email: mark.novak@outlook.com


   Yogesh Deshpande
   arm
   Email: Yogesh.Deshpande@arm.com
