



WIMSE                                                           M. Novak
Internet-Draft                                         J.P. Morgan Chase
Intended status: Informational                              Y. Deshpande
Expires: 20 November 2025                                            arm
                                                             19 May 2025


            Trusted Workload Identity Reference Architecture
                draft-twi-reference-architecture-latest

Abstract

   Technological advancement coupled with security concerns results in
   multiple use cases that require data-in-use protections.  In
   addition, regulatory bodies around the world increasingly require
   data-in-use protection and privacy enhancing technologies.  As these
   advanced technologies are being deployed, the challenge is how to
   identify the workloads and place trust in them?  This draft will
   address the core issue of managing a Trustworthy Workload Identity
   meeting Confidential Computing requirements.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/confidential-computing/twi.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 20 November 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Glossary
     3.1.  Workload Identity
     3.2.  Workload Credential
   4.  TWI Use Cases
   5.  Core Requirements
   6.  Alignment or Synergy with WIMSE Architecture
   7.  Divergence from WIMSE
     7.1.  Workload Confidentiality
     7.2.  Workload Provenance
       7.2.1.  Obtaining Workload provenance
       7.2.2.  Integrating Workload Provenance with Credential
               Issuance
     7.3.  Workload to Platform binding
     7.4.  Remote Attestation
       7.4.1.  Integrating Workload Attestation with Credential
               Issuance
       7.4.2.  Remote Attestation of Composite Workloads
   8.  TWI Reference Architecture
     8.1.  Assumptions
     8.2.  Roles in the TWI Eco-System
       8.2.1.  Verifier
       8.2.2.  Identity Provider
       8.2.3.  Credential Issuer
     8.3.  Reference Architecture
       8.3.1.  Using Remote Attestation to obtain an X.509 Certificate
               Credential from a Certificate Authority
       8.3.2.  Using Remote Attestation to obtain a Credential from an
               HSM
       8.3.3.  Workload Provenance
   9.  Security Considerations
   10. IANA Considerations
     10.1.  CBOR Tag Registrations
   11. Acknowledgements
   12. References
     12.1.  Normative References
     12.2.  Informative References
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   To be filled

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document uses terms and concepts defined by the WIMSE and RATS
   architectures, as well as to the terms defined by the Trustworthy
   Workload Identity Special Interest Gorup at the Confidential
   Computing Consortium.  For a complete glossary, see Section 4 of
   [RFC9334] & [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch].  TODO: utilize the link to
   the TWI SIG charter (https://github.com/confidential-
   computing/governance/blob/main/SIGs/TWI/TWI_Charter.md) or add its
   definitions here.

3.  Glossary

   This document uses the following terms:

3.1.  Workload Identity

3.2.  Workload Credential

4.  TWI Use Cases

   Like WIMSE, TWI seeks to associate identities with workloads.
   However, for an Identity to be Trustworthy, a few additional
   requirements must be met:

   1.  Isolate Workloads' data in use, including their Credentials, from
       the untrusted hosting environment.

   2.  Guarantee that a Workload can only utilize Credentials issued to
       it and that its Credentials cannot leak and be used by
       unauthorized Workloads.

   3.  Enable the Relying Parties and other interested parties, such as
       auditors, to make in-depth inquiries into the trustworthiness of
       the authenticating Workload.

5.  Core Requirements

   The TWI Core Requirements can be located here.  (TODO incorporate
   this link: https://github.com/confidential-computing/twi/blob/main/
   TWI_Requirements.md)

   For Use Case 1, the Workload MUST run in an isolated, remotely
   attested Trusted Execution Environment.  Therefore, the process of
   obtaining the Credentials MUST involve a Verifier service in addition
   to the Identity Provider service.  For Use Case 2, the Workload
   Credentials MUST be strongly bound to the Workload instance to which
   they are issued and the secrets utilized for authentications to
   Relying Parties using these Credentials MUST be covered by data-in-
   use protections in a manner they are procured and utilized.  For Use
   Case 3, the issued Workload Credentials MUST contain information from
   which the Provenance of the workload can be determined.

6.  Alignment or Synergy with WIMSE Architecture

   WIMSE defines an architecture for managing workload identity in
   multi-system environments.

   1.  The WIMSE Architecture, explains the core concept of Workload
       Identity in-line with the concept of identity in a TWI world.

   2.  WIMSE model has a CA/Credential issuer that is responsible with
       provisioning identity credentials to the workload.  TWI
       requirement is roughly similar in terms of issuing credential.
       However the requirements and policies applied for issuing
       credentials vary as described in the divergence section.

   3.  WIMSE Architecture, defines Trust Domain, which is the authority
       that identifies domain within which the identifier is scoped.
       TWI Architecture, is aligned with this basic building block.

7.  Divergence from WIMSE

   Trustworthy Workload Identity as detailed in this document has
   following fundamental divergence from core WIMSE Architecture.

7.1.  Workload Confidentiality

   The confidentiality and integrity of Workload is isolated from the
   hosting environment and other workloads.

7.2.  Workload Provenance

   Workload Provenance is the metadata pertaining to workload, as below.
   1.  Workload Composition, i.e. a detailed list of components that
   comprise a workload.  This could be expressed as Software Bill of
   Materials expressed in terms of industry standards, like SPDX or
   CycloneDX.

   1.  Details about the Continous Integration (CI) or Continous
       Delivery (CD) of Workload

   2.  Set of Compliance tests that executed on the workload.

   3.  Details of Vendor/SaaS information.

   The policy for issuing Credentials may demand the information about
   the Provenance of the Workload.  This requries work in two
   fundamental areas (a) Obtaining the provenance information about the
   workload AND (b) Conveying the provenance information inside the
   Credential.

7.2.1.  Obtaining Workload provenance

   The Workload Provenance can be made available in a transparent
   manner, which can be audited and verifiable by independent parties.
   While it is a policy of the implementation as to how it obtains the
   provenance information, the trustworthiness aspect associated to
   provenance information can be verified during the runtime
   trustworthiness assessment of a workload, through the means of Remote
   Attestation, at the time of workload acquiring the credentials from
   credential issuer.

7.2.2.  Integrating Workload Provenance with Credential Issuance

   The provenance information can be attached to the Workload
   credentials using a well defined protocol.

7.3.  Workload to Platform binding

7.4.  Remote Attestation

   Remote Attestation plays a fundamental role in attesting the Workload
   and ensuring that the Workload is running on a platform that provides
   required trustwrothy guarantees.

7.4.1.  Integrating Workload Attestation with Credential Issuance

   The Credential Issuer would process the Attestation Results and apply
   its own Appraisal Policy for Attestation results prior to issuing
   Credentials.

7.4.2.  Remote Attestation of Composite Workloads

8.  TWI Reference Architecture

   This sections describes in detail the Reference Architecture for a
   Trusted Workload Identity system.

8.1.  Assumptions

8.2.  Roles in the TWI Eco-System

   The following sub-sections describe the various roles that exist in
   the TWI ecosystem.

8.2.1.  Verifier

8.2.2.  Identity Provider

8.2.3.  Credential Issuer

8.3.  Reference Architecture

8.3.1.  Using Remote Attestation to obtain an X.509 Certificate
        Credential from a Certificate Authority

8.3.2.  Using Remote Attestation to obtain a Credential from an HSM

8.3.3.  Workload Provenance

9.  Security Considerations


   // TODO

10.  IANA Considerations

10.1.  CBOR Tag Registrations

11.  Acknowledgements


   // TODO

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

12.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch]
              Salowey, J. A., Rosomakho, Y., and H. Tschofenig,
              "Workload Identity in a Multi System Environment (WIMSE)
              Architecture", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-wimse-arch-04, 2 March 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-wimse-
              arch-04>.

   [RFC9334]  Birkholz, H., Thaler, D., Richardson, M., Smith, N., and
              W. Pan, "Remote ATtestation procedureS (RATS)
              Architecture", RFC 9334, DOI 10.17487/RFC9334, January
              2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9334>.

Authors' Addresses

   Mark Novak
   J.P. Morgan Chase
   Email: mark.f.novak@jpmchase.com


   Yogesh Deshpande
   arm
   Email: Yogesh.Deshpande@arm.com
