



WIMSE                                                           M. Novak
Internet-Draft                                         J.P. Morgan Chase
Intended status: Informational                              Y. Deshpande
Expires: 12 December 2025                                            arm
                                                            10 June 2025


          Trustworthy Workload Identity Reference Architecture
                draft-twi-reference-architecture-latest

Abstract

   This document illustrates a gap analysis that is the output of the
   Confidential Computing Consortium identifying areas in the IETF WIMSE
   WG work where the current WIMSE architecture should be amended to
   accommodate workloads running in Confidential Computing environments.
   This document outlines high-level requirements for the these
   extensions and describes a series of use cases.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/confidential-computing/twi-wimse.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 12 December 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Gap Analysis
   4.  Integration of Confidential Computing into WIMSE
     4.1.  Secure Key Storage & Cryptographic Operations
     4.2.  Enhanced Bootstrapping with Attestation
     4.3.  Protected Credential Exchange
     4.4.  Mitigating Runtime Compromise
     4.5.  Cross-domain Trust Enhancement
   5.  TWI Use Cases
   6.  Core Requirements
   7.  Alignment or Synergy with WIMSE Architecture
   8.  Extensions to WIMSE Architecture
     8.1.  Workload Isolation
     8.2.  Provenance
       8.2.1.  Workload Provenance
       8.2.2.  Credential Provenance
     8.3.  Workload to Platform binding
     8.4.  Remote Attestation
       8.4.1.  Integrating Workload Attestation with Credential
               Issuance
       8.4.2.  Remote Attestation of Composite Workloads
   9.  Security Considerations
   10. IANA Considerations
   11. Acknowledgements
   12. References
     12.1.  Normative References
     12.2.  Informative References
   Index
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Until recently, there were few scenarios requiring data-in-use
   protection.  This is starting to change.  Regulatory bodies worldwide
   are increasingly requiring data-in-use protection and privacy
   enhancing technologies.  Outside of regulatory requirements,
   companies are exploring:

   *  Multiparty computation

   *  Machine learning training & inferencing

   *  Addressing the risks of computing in public clouds and high-risk
      locations

   *  Entrusting confidential data to SaaS providers

   *  Insider threats, and other reasons for protecting data-in-use

   Correspondingly, there is an increased push to harmonize management
   and governance of human and non-human identities.  Modern workloads
   may operate on their own behalf with their own credentials, or as
   agents on behalf of other entities with delegated credentials.
   Entities interested in strong assurances around the security of their
   deployed workloads, for regulatory, contractual or peace of mind
   reasons, are starting to face large and challenging tasks of
   upgrading their existing computing system infrastructure to meet
   these requirements.  Current ways of issuing and managing workload
   identities, as well as those required for effective protection of
   data-in-use, are subject to multiple architectural challenges; chief
   among them:

   1.  Lack of workload isolation against the hardware and the operating
       system owners/administrators, as well as peer workload instances

   2.  Lack of strong binding between a workload credential and the
       workload instance to which that credential had been issued

   3.  Lack of verifiable composition of the workload, and inability to
       associate a credential with a set of decisions leading up to its
       issuance

   It is important to highlight that these requirements are related:
   lack of process isolation eases credential exfiltration and leads to
   credential leakage and reuse.

   Longer term, however, Confidential Computing provides a vital
   improvement due to its unique features (i.e., verifiable composition,
   strong workload isolation) and broad availability (i.e., support by
   all major hardware vendors).  Multiple emerging regulations will mean
   that customers will be looking to these features and capabilities to
   satisfy them.

   Confidential Computing-assisted mechanisms have to align with the
   emerging Workload Identity solution ecosystem.  Correspondingly, the
   evolution of the Workload Identity ecosystem should remain in
   alignment with the expectations of the owners and operators of
   Confidential Computing workloads.  To address this set of
   requirements, this document defines and elaborates on the concept of
   Trustworthy Workload Identity (TWI) in the following Sections.  Data-
   in-use protection of workloads supporting TWI results in critical
   downstream effects.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document uses terms and concepts defined by the WIMSE and RATS
   architectures, as well as to the terms defined by the Trustworthy
   Workload Identity Special Interest Gorup at the Confidential
   Computing Consortium.  For a complete glossary, see Section 4 of
   [RFC9334] , [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch] & [TWISIGCharter].

   The definitions of terms like Workload Identity, Workload Credential
   and Workload Provenance match those specified by the TWI SIG Charter
   [TWISIGCharter].

   Workload:  a running instance of software executed in support of a
      specific purpose.

      The definition of Workload in this document restricts the
      definition of the term Workload as defined by
      [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch] to composition of code and
      configuration of a (WIMSE-defined) Workload that is subject to
      Remote Attestation.

   Workload Identifier:  a stable value construct in support of a
      Relying Party's long-lived Workload authorization policies.

   Workload Identity:  the definition of Workload Identity is identical
      to the definition of [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch]: "a combination
      of three basic building blocks: trust domain, Workload Identifier
      and identity credentials.

   Workload Credential:  an ephemeral identity document containing the
      Workload Identifier and a number of additional claims, that can be
      short-lived or long-lived, and that is used to represent and prove
      Workload Identity to a Relying Party.

   Workload Provenance:  a linkage between a Workload Credential and a
      trusted entity (e.g., a vendor, developer, or issuer) responsible
      for the production and/or the remote attestation of a
      corresponding Workload.

3.  Gap Analysis

   The following risks where identified by a gap analysis of the current
   WIMSE architecture [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch] performed by the
   Confidential Computing Consortium.  The gap analysis provides a basis
   for identify extensions necessary to meet the level of
   trustworthiness required by confidential computing environments:

   *  Protection of Credentials at Runtime, Key Management in Dynamic
      Environments and Insufficient Runtime Attestation:

      -  Risk that credentials in memory could be exposed if a
         workload’s execution environment is compromised.

      -  The current solutions rely on traditional key management
         practices which may not be good enough against sophisticated
         runtime attacks.

      -  Runtime can still be compromised, even if keys are securely
         managed, a compromised runtime can still leak.  Similarly, a
         secure runtime is less effective if key management is weak.
         Integrating both robust key lifecycle management and continuous
         runtime attestation provides better security.

   *  Token Replay and Misuse in Cross-domain Scenarios:

      -  Even with proper token binding, the risk of replay attacks or
         the use of compromised tokens across trust boundaries remains,
         especially if an attacker manages to intercept tokens during
         service-to-service exchanges.

4.  Integration of Confidential Computing into WIMSE

4.1.  Secure Key Storage & Cryptographic Operations

   With TEE’s, a workload’s private keys and sensitive cryptographic
   operations (such as signing or validating tokens) can be isolated
   from the host OS.  Reducing the risk of key leakage even if the
   surrounding system is compromised.  (For instance, the WIMSE token—be
   it a JWT or an X.509 certificate—can be generated and signed within a
   TEE, ensuring that the proof-of-possession mechanism remains intact.)

4.2.  Enhanced Bootstrapping with Attestation

   Strengthening the initial bootstrapping process.  A TEE can provide
   hardware-based attestation that a workload is running in a secure,
   isolated environment.  This attestation could be used as an
   additional factor during credential provisioning, ensuring that only
   workloads running in a TEE receive valid credentials.


   // might be a bit of a stretch/ too much - it basically would be an
   // extension of the bootstrapping projects described in
   // https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-wimse-arch-03)

4.3.  Protected Credential Exchange

   For the credential exchange patterns defined in the WIMSE Credential
   Exchange draft, confidential computing can provide a secure enclave
   in which the exchange logic runs.  This ensures that the process of
   exchanging or re-provisioning credentials is protected against
   tampering and eavesdropping.

4.4.  Mitigating Runtime Compromise

   Incorporating confidential computing within the workload’s execution
   environment can lower the risk that runtime attacks (such as memory
   scraping or side-channel attacks) can expose critical identity or
   authentication tokens.  For example, the confidential computing
   environment can be used to securely generate and verify proofs of
   possession that are important within the WIMSE authentication
   protocol.

4.5.  Cross-domain Trust Enhancement

   In multi-cloud and cross-trust-domain interactions, a hardware-rooted
   attestation from a TEE can serve as an independent trust anchor.
   This extra layer of verification helps ensure that even if
   traditional software-based checks fail, the actual workload identity
   remains trustworthy.

5.  TWI Use Cases

   TODO: Revisit this section to see if we need it or if we can lean on
   the section just above this.

   Like WIMSE, TWI seeks to associate identities with workloads.
   However, for an Identity to be Trustworthy, a few additional
   requirements must be met:

   1.  Isolate Workloads' data-in-use, including their Credentials, from
       the untrusted hosting environment.

   2.  Guarantee that a Workload can only utilize Credentials issued to
       it and that its Credentials cannot leak and be used by
       unauthorized Workloads.

   3.  Enable the Relying Parties and other interested parties, such as
       auditors, to make in-depth inquiries into the trustworthiness of
       the Workload based on its Credentials.

6.  Core Requirements

   The TWI Core Requirements can be located [TWISIGReq].

   For Use Case 1, the Workload MUST run in an isolated, remotely
   attested Trusted Execution Environment.  Therefore, the process of
   obtaining the Credentials MUST involve a Verifier service in addition
   to the Identity Provider service.

   For Use Case 2, the Workload Credentials MUST be strongly bound to
   the Workload instance to which they are issued and the secrets
   utilized for authentications to Relying Parties using these
   Credentials MUST be covered by data-in-use protections in a manner
   they are procured and utilized.

   For Use Case 3, the issued Workload Credentials MUST contain
   information from which the Provenance of the workload can be
   determined.

7.  Alignment or Synergy with WIMSE Architecture

   WIMSE defines an architecture for managing workload identity in
   multi-system environments.

   1.  The WIMSE Architecture, explains the core concept of Workload
       Identity in-line with the concept of identity in a TWI world.

   2.  WIMSE model has a CA/Credential issuer that is responsible with
       provisioning identity credentials to the workload.  TWI
       requirement is roughly similar in terms of issuing credentials.
       However the requirements and policies applied when issuing
       credentials vary as described in the Divergence section below.

   3.  WIMSE Architecture defines Trust Domain, which is the authority
       that identifies domain within which the identifier is scoped.
       TWI Architecture is aligned with this basic building block.

8.  Extensions to WIMSE Architecture

   Trustworthy Workload Identity as detailed in this document proposes
   the following extensions and changes to the core WIMSE Architecture.

8.1.  Workload Isolation

   The confidentiality and integrity of a Workload is isolated from the
   hosting environment and other Workloads.

8.2.  Provenance

8.2.1.  Workload Provenance

   Workload Provenance is the metadata pertaining to workload, as below.
   1.  Workload Composition, i.e. a detailed list of components that
   comprise a workload.  This could be expressed as Software Bill of
   Materials expressed in terms of industry standards, like SPDX or
   CycloneDX.

   1.  Details about the Continous Integration (CI) or Continous
       Delivery (CD) of Workload

   2.  Set of Compliance tests that executed on the workload.

   3.  Details of Vendor/SaaS information.

   The policy for issuing Credentials may demand the information about
   the Provenance of the Workload.  This requries work in two areas (a)
   Obtaining the provenance information about the workload AND (b)
   Conveying the provenance information inside the Credential.

8.2.1.1.  Obtaining Workload provenance

   The Workload Provenance can be made available in a transparent
   manner, which can be audited and verifiable by independent parties.
   While it is a policy of the implementation as to how it obtains the
   provenance information, the trustworthiness aspect associated to
   provenance information can be verified during the runtime
   trustworthiness assessment of a workload, through the means of Remote
   Attestation, at the time of workload acquiring the credentials from
   credential issuer.

8.2.1.2.  Integrating Workload Provenance with Credential Issuance

   The provenance information can be attached to the Workload
   credentials using a well-defined protocol.

8.2.2.  Credential Provenance

   Credential Provenance is the metadata pertaining to the credential
   issuance itself, binding the:

   *  Workload (including Workload Provenance (Section 8.2.1)),

   *  Verifier (as defined in Section 4.1 of [RFC9334]), including the
      criteria it applied to the attestation evidence.

   *  Credential Issuer (including its issuance policies effective at
      the time),

   While the Workload Identity remains unchanged for as long as the
   Workload properties remain stable, a unique Credential Provenance
   MUST be generated each time a Workload Credential is issued.

   Creation of a Credential Provenance record SHOULD additionally be
   recorded in a transparency log (if in use by the solution), to
   provide discoverability, immutability and non-repudiation by the
   issuer.  The transparency log record MAY be encrypted to prevent
   disclosure of Personally Identifiable Information (PII) or buisness-
   critical data.

8.3.  Workload to Platform binding

8.4.  Remote Attestation

   Remote Attestation plays a fundamental role in attesting the Workload
   and ensuring that the Workload is running on a platform that provides
   required trustwrothiness guarantees.

8.4.1.  Integrating Workload Attestation with Credential Issuance

   The Credential Issuer would process the Attestation Results and apply
   its own Appraisal Policy for Attestation results prior to issuing
   Credentials.

8.4.2.  Remote Attestation of Composite Workloads

9.  Security Considerations


   // TODO

10.  IANA Considerations

   It is foreseen that additional CBOR OIDS will be needed for new
   evidence types.  As these new evidence types emerge in later
   documents IANA will need to issue OIDS to standardize the new
   evidence definitions across attestation systems.

11.  Acknowledgements


   // TODO

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

12.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch]
              Salowey, J. A., Rosomakho, Y., and H. Tschofenig,
              "Workload Identity in a Multi System Environment (WIMSE)
              Architecture", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-wimse-arch-04, 2 March 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-wimse-
              arch-04>.

   [RFC9334]  Birkholz, H., Thaler, D., Richardson, M., Smith, N., and
              W. Pan, "Remote ATtestation procedureS (RATS)
              Architecture", RFC 9334, DOI 10.17487/RFC9334, January
              2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9334>.

   [TWISIGCharter]
              Confidential Computing Consortium Trustworthy Workload
              Identity SIG, "Trustworthy Workload Identity (TWI) Special
              Interest Group — Charter", n.d., <https://github.com/
              confidential-computing/governance/blob/main/SIGs/TWI/
              TWI_Charter.md>.

   [TWISIGReq]
              Confidential Computing Consortium Trustworthy Workload
              Identity SIG, "Trustworthy Workload Identity (TWI) Special
              Interest Group — Requirements", n.d., <https://github.com/
              confidential-computing/twi/blob/main/TWI_Requirements.md>.

Index

   C

      C

         Credential Issuer  Section 8.2.2, Paragraph 2.3.1

Authors' Addresses

   Mark Novak
   J.P. Morgan Chase
   Email: mark.f.novak@jpmchase.com


   Yogesh Deshpande
   arm
   Email: Yogesh.Deshpande@arm.com
