



WIMSE                                                           M. Novak
Internet-Draft                                         J.P. Morgan Chase
Intended status: Informational                              Y. Deshpande
Expires: 27 November 2025                                            arm
                                                             26 May 2025


          Trustworthy Workload Identity Reference Architecture
                draft-twi-reference-architecture-latest

Abstract

   This Internet-Draft covers a gap analysis performed by the
   Confidential Computing Consortium on WIMSE identifying areas where
   the current WIMSE Architecture should be extended to accommodate
   Workloads running in Confidential Computing environments.  It
   outlines high-level requirements for the these extensions and
   describes a series of use cases.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/confidential-computing/twi-wimse.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 27 November 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Gap Analysis
   3.  Conventions and Definitions
   4.  Integration of Confidential Computing into WIMSE
   5.  TWI Use Cases
   6.  Core Requirements
   7.  Alignment or Synergy with WIMSE Architecture
   8.  Extensions to WIMSE Architecture
     8.1.  Workload Isolation
     8.2.  Provenance
       8.2.1.  Workload Provenance
       8.2.2.  Credential Provenance
     8.3.  Workload to Platform binding
     8.4.  Remote Attestation
       8.4.1.  Integrating Workload Attestation with Credential
               Issuance
       8.4.2.  Remote Attestation of Composite Workloads
   9.  Security Considerations
   10. IANA Considerations
   11. Acknowledgements
   12. References
     12.1.  Normative References
     12.2.  Informative References
   Index
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Until recently, there were few scenarios demanding data-in-use
   protections.  This is starting to change.  Regulatory bodies
   worldwide are increasingly requiring data-in-use protection and
   privacy-enhancing technologies.  Outside of regulatory requirements,
   companies are exploring multiparty computation, machine learning
   training & inferencing, addressing the actual and perceived risks of
   computing in the public clouds, insider threats, and other reasons
   for protecting data-in-use.  Correspondingly, there is an increased
   push to harmonize management and governance of human and non-human
   identities.  Enterprises interested in strong assurances around the
   security of their deployed Workloads, for regulatory, contractual and
   peace of mind reasons, will soon face large and challenging tasks of
   upgrading their existing IT systems to meet these requirements.
   Current ways of issuing and managing workload identities, as well as
   those required for effective protection of data-in-use, suffer from
   several architectural shortcomings; chief among them:

   1.  Lack of Workload isolation against the hardware and the operating
       system owners/administrators, as well as peer Workload instances

   2.  Lack of strong binding between a Workload Credential and the
       Workload instance to which that Credential had been issued

   3.  Inability to associate a Credential with a set of decisions
       leading up to its issuance _Note that these requirements are
       related: lack of process isolation eases credential exfiltration
       and leads to credential leakage and reuse._

   The Confidential Computing Consortium defines Confidential Computing
   as "protection of data in use by performing computation in a
   hardware-based, attested Trusted Execution Environment (TEE)".  In
   the immediate term, effective Confidential Computing faces a
   significant challenge: the scale of uplift and immature tooling are
   both clear barriers.  Longer term, however, Confidential Computing
   provides a vital improvement due to its unique features and broad
   availability.  Confidential Computing-assisted mechanisms have to fit
   inside the emerging Workload Identity solution ecosystem.  The
   evolution of this ecosystem should remain in alignment with the
   expectations of the owners and operators of Confidential Computing
   Workloads.  These efforts will build on the concept of _Trustworthy
   Workload Identity_ defined further below.  Data-in-use protection of
   Workloads that have such Identities will be a critical downstream
   effect.

   While it is quite clear that for the foreseeable future this need is
   not going to be met by Confidential Computing alone, the security
   features related to Workload identification and isolation offered by
   Confidential Computing eclipse other approaches.  Confidential
   Computing-strengthened Workload Identity will need to be designed to
   fit within, and ideally serve as the North Star of Workload Identity
   as it becomes a foundational pillar of trustworthy and governable
   enterprise computing.

2.  Gap Analysis

   An analysis was performed by the Confidential Computing Consortium of
   the existing WIMSE Architecture to identify extensions necessary to
   meet the level of trustworthiness required by Confidential Computing
   environments.

   *  Protection of Credentials at runtime, key management in dynamic
      environments:

      -  Risk that credentials in memory could be exposed if a
         workload’s execution environment is compromised.

      -  The current solutions rely on traditional key management
         practices which may not withstand common runtime attacks.

      -  Runtime can still be compromised, even if keys are securely
         managed, a compromised runtime can still leak.  Similarly, a
         secure runtime is less effective if key management is weak.
         Integrating both robust key lifecycle management and continuous
         runtime attestation provides better security.

   *  Insufficient runtime attestation

      -  Confidential Computing seeks to isolate Workload instances from
         both the hosting environments and peer Workloads.  WIMSE
         Architecture is built on a foundational assumption that the
         hosting environment is fully trusted, whereas under
         Confidential Computing remote attestation is used to ascertain
         the identity of the Workload irrespective of the hosting
         environment.  Further, some scenarios seek to combine claims
         about the Workload instance with claims, such as physical
         location, of the hosting environment, and different yet
         collaborating attestation mechanisms must be employed to
         achieve that.

      -  Confidential Computing employs a Verifier service to perform
         remote attestation, which is different from an identity
         provider that is tasked with Credential issuance.  The identity
         provider must take Attestation Results returned by the Verifier
         into account when computing Workload Identifiers and issuing
         Workload Credentials.

   *  Token Replay and Misuse in Cross-domain Scenarios: Even with
      proper token binding, the risk of replay attacks or the use of
      compromised tokens across trust boundaries remains, especially if
      an attacker manages to intercept tokens during service-to-service
      exchanges.

   *  Lack of ability to ascertain Provenance of a Workload from its
      Credential: Ability of a relying party or an auditor to inspect a
      credential to gauge its trustworthiness is an important feature
      for differentiated authorization of high-value, high-risk
      transactions and regulated environments.

3.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document uses terms and concepts defined by the WIMSE and RATS
   architectures, as well as to the terms defined by the Trustworthy
   Workload Identity Special Interest Gorup at the Confidential
   Computing Consortium.  For a complete glossary, see Section 4 of
   [RFC9334] , [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch] & [TWISIGCharter].

   The definitions of terms like Workload Identity, Workload Credential
   and Workload Provenance match those specified by the TWI SIG Charter
   [TWISIGCharter].

   *  *Workload* as used in this document restricts the definition of
      the same term by WIMSE – "a running instance of software executing
      for a specific purpose" – to just that part of the code and
      configuration of the (WIMSE-defined) Workload that is subject to
      Remote Attestation.

   *  *Workload Identifier* is a stable construct around which Relying
      Parties can form long-lived Workload authorization policies.

   *  *Workload Identity* is defined exactly as it is by WIMSE
      [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch] – a combination of three basic
      building blocks: trust domain, Workload Identifier and identity
      credentials.

   *  *Workload Credential* is an ephemeral identity document containing
      the Workload Identifier and a number of additional claims, that
      can be short- or long-lived and which is used to represent and
      prove Workload Identity to a relying party.

   *  *Workload Provenance* is a linkage between a Workload Credential
      and a trusted entity (e.g., a vendor, developer, or issuer)
      responsible for the creation and/or attestation of the
      corresponding Workload.

   In the light of the definitions just given, a Workload Identity is
   said to be Trustworthy iff the following three properties hold true:

   1.  The Workload is confidentiality- and integrity-isolated from its
       hosting environment as well as peer workloads throughout the
       lifetime of the Workload instance

   2.  Any credential representing a Workload Identity is bound to that
       Workload instance

   3.  A Workload Credential can be traced back to the Workload’s
       Provenance and the credential issuer

4.  Integration of Confidential Computing into WIMSE

   *Secure Key Storage & Cryptographic Operations:* With TEE’s, a
   Workload’s private keys and sensitive cryptographic operations (such
   as signing or validating tokens) can be isolated from the hosting
   environment, reducing the risk of key leakage even if the surrounding
   system is compromised.  (For instance, the key backing a WIMSE token
   — be it a WIT or an X.509 certificate — can be generated within a
   TEE, ensuring that the proof-of-possession mechanism remains intact.)
   Alternatively, a key for a WIT or an X.509 certificate could be
   obtained from an HSM contingent on successful remote attestation of a
   Workload instance.

   *Enhanced Bootstrapping with Attestation:* Strengthening the initial
   bootstrapping process.  A TEE can provide hardware-based attestation
   that a workload is running in a secure, isolated environment.  This
   attestation could be used as an additional factor during Credential
   provisioning, ensuring that only Workloads running in a TEE receive
   valid Credentials.  (TODO: revisit: might be a bit of a stretch/ too
   much - it basically would be an extension of the bootstrapping
   projects described in https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
   ietf-wimse-arch-03).

   *Protected Credential Exchange:* For the Credential exchange patterns
   defined in the WIMSE Credential Exchange draft, Confidential
   Computing can provide a secure Trusted Execution Environment in which
   the exchange logic runs.  This ensures that the process of exchanging
   or re-provisioning credentials is protected against tampering and
   eavesdropping.

   *Mitigating Runtime Compromise:* Incorporating confidential computing
   within the workload’s execution environment can lower the risk that
   runtime attacks (such as memory scraping or side-channel attacks) can
   expose critical identity or authentication tokens.  For example, the
   confidential computing environment can be used to securely generate
   and verify proofs of possession that are important within the WIMSE
   authentication protocol.

   *Cross-domain Trust Enhancement:* In multi-cloud and cross-trust-
   domain interactions, a hardware-rooted attestation from a TEE can
   serve as an independent trust anchor.  This extra layer of
   verification helps ensure that even if traditional software-based
   checks fail, the actual Workload Identity remains trustworthy.

5.  TWI Use Cases

   TODO: Revisit this section to see if we need it or if we can lean on
   the section just above this.

   Like WIMSE, TWI seeks to associate identities with workloads.
   However, for an Identity to be Trustworthy, a few additional
   requirements must be met:

   1.  Isolate Workloads' data-in-use, including their Credentials, from
       the untrusted hosting environment.

   2.  Guarantee that a Workload can only utilize Credentials issued to
       it and that its Credentials cannot leak and be used by
       unauthorized Workloads.

   3.  Enable the Relying Parties and other interested parties, such as
       auditors, to make in-depth inquiries into the trustworthiness of
       the Workload based on its Credentials.

6.  Core Requirements

   The TWI Core Requirements can be located [TWISIGReq].

   For Use Case 1, the Workload MUST run in an isolated, remotely
   attested Trusted Execution Environment.  Therefore, the process of
   obtaining the Credentials MUST involve a Verifier service in addition
   to the Identity Provider service.

   For Use Case 2, the Workload Credentials MUST be strongly bound to
   the Workload instance to which they are issued and the secrets
   utilized for authentications to Relying Parties using these
   Credentials MUST be covered by data-in-use protections in the manner
   they are procured and utilized.

   For Use Case 3, the issued Workload Credentials MUST contain
   information from which the Provenance of the Workload can be
   determined.

7.  Alignment or Synergy with WIMSE Architecture

   WIMSE defines an architecture for managing workload identity in
   multi-system environments.

   1.  The WIMSE Architecture, explains the core concept of Workload
       Identity in-line with the concept of identity in a TWI world.

   2.  WIMSE model has a CA/Credential issuer that is responsible for
       provisioning identity credentials to the workload.  TWI
       requirement is roughly similar in terms of issuing credentials.
       However the requirements and policies applied when issuing
       credentials vary as described in the Divergence section below.

   3.  WIMSE Architecture defines Trust Domain, which is the authority
       that identifies domain within which the identifier is scoped.
       TWI Architecture is aligned with this basic building block.

8.  Extensions to WIMSE Architecture

   Trustworthy Workload Identity as detailed in this document proposes
   the following extensions and changes to the core WIMSE Architecture.

8.1.  Workload Isolation

   The confidentiality and integrity of a Workload is isolated from the
   hosting environment and other Workloads.

8.2.  Provenance

8.2.1.  Workload Provenance

   Workload Provenance is the metadata pertaining to the Workload.
   Provenance MAY contain information about a variety of aspects of
   inputs and decisions that went into the creation of a Workload, as
   below. 1.  Workload Composition, i.e. a detailed list of components
   that comprise a Workload.  This could be expressed as a Software Bill
   of Materials expressed in terms of industry standards, like SPDX or
   CycloneDX <TODO: add references?>.

   1.  Details about the Continous Integration (CI) or Continous
       Delivery (CD) of Workload.

   2.  Set of compliance tests that executed on the Workload.

   3.  Details of Vendor/SaaS information.

   The policy for assessing or auditing Credentials MAY demand the
   information about the Provenance of the Workload.  This requries work
   in three areas: 1.  Collection: the process of compiling Provenance
   information about the Workload during the processes that lead up to
   the creation of a Credential 2.  Conveyance: the mechanism by which
   Provenance is carried inside the Workload Credential and 3.
   Utilization: Provenance information inside the Credential to make the
   required decisions.  The Workload Credential need not carry the
   entire Provenance of the Workload, but MAY instead contain a unique
   Provenance Identifier that an interested party may later use to look
   up the full Provenance.  The mechanism of translating the Provenance
   Identifier into the full Provenance is TBD.

8.2.1.1.  Obtaining Workload Provenance

   The Workload Provenance can be made available in a transparent
   manner, which can be audited and verifiable by independent parties.
   While it is a policy of the implementation as to how it obtains the
   provenance information, the trustworthiness aspect associated to
   Provenance information can be verified during the runtime
   trustworthiness assessment of a Workload, through the means of Remote
   Attestation, at the time of Workload acquiring the Credentials from
   credential issuer.

8.2.1.2.  Integrating Workload Provenance with Credential Issuance

   The Provenance information can be attached to the Workload
   credentials using a well-defined protocol.

8.2.2.  Credential Provenance

   Credential Provenance is the metadata pertaining to the credential
   issuance itself, binding the:

   *  Workload (including Workload Provenance (Section 8.2.1)),

   *  Verifier (as defined in Section 4.1 of [RFC9334]), including the
      criteria it applied to the attestation evidence.

   *  Credential Issuer (including its issuance policies effective at
      the time),

   While the Workload Identity remains unchanged for as long as the
   Workload properties remain stable, a unique Credential Provenance
   MUST be generated each time a Workload Credential is issued.

   Creation of a Credential Provenance record SHOULD additionally be
   recorded in a transparency log (if in use by the solution), to
   provide discoverability, immutability and non-repudiation by the
   issuer.  The transparency log record MAY be encrypted to prevent
   disclosure of Personally Identifiable Information (PII) or buisness-
   critical data.

8.3.  Workload to Platform binding

8.4.  Remote Attestation

   Remote Attestation plays a fundamental role in attesting the Workload
   and ensuring that the Workload is running on a platform that provides
   required trustwrothiness guarantees.

8.4.1.  Integrating Workload Attestation with Credential Issuance

   The Credential Issuer would process the Attestation Results and apply
   its own Appraisal Policy for Attestation results prior to issuing
   Credentials.

8.4.2.  Remote Attestation of Composite Workloads

9.  Security Considerations


   // TODO

10.  IANA Considerations

   It is foreseen that additional CBOR OIDS will be needed for new
   evidence types.  As these new evidence types emerge in later
   documents IANA will need to issue OIDS to standardize the new
   evidence definitions across attestation systems.

11.  Acknowledgements


   // TODO

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

12.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.draft-ietf-wimse-arch]
              Salowey, J. A., Rosomakho, Y., and H. Tschofenig,
              "Workload Identity in a Multi System Environment (WIMSE)
              Architecture", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-wimse-arch-04, 2 March 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-wimse-
              arch-04>.

   [RFC9334]  Birkholz, H., Thaler, D., Richardson, M., Smith, N., and
              W. Pan, "Remote ATtestation procedureS (RATS)
              Architecture", RFC 9334, DOI 10.17487/RFC9334, January
              2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9334>.

   [TWISIGCharter]
              Confidential Computing Consortium Trustworthy Workload
              Identity SIG, "Trustworthy Workload Identity (TWI) Special
              Interest Group — Charter", n.d., <https://github.com/
              confidential-computing/governance/blob/main/SIGs/TWI/
              TWI_Charter.md>.

   [TWISIGReq]
              Confidential Computing Consortium Trustworthy Workload
              Identity SIG, "Trustworthy Workload Identity (TWI) Special
              Interest Group — Requirements", n.d., <https://github.com/
              confidential-computing/twi/blob/main/TWI_Requirements.md>.

Index

   C W

      C

         Credential Issuer  Section 8.2.2, Paragraph 2.3.1

      W

         Workload  Section 3, Paragraph 4.1.1
         Workload Credential  Section 3, Paragraph 4.4.1
         Workload Identifier  Section 3, Paragraph 4.2.1
         Workload Identity  Section 3, Paragraph 4.3.1
         Workload Provenance  Section 3, Paragraph 4.5.1

Authors' Addresses

   Mark Novak
   J.P. Morgan Chase
   Email: mark.f.novak@jpmchase.com


   Yogesh Deshpande
   arm
   Email: Yogesh.Deshpande@arm.com
